[Serve] Add doc for serve replica scheduling (#59114)
ray-project/ray: doc/source/serve/advanced-guides/replica-scheduling.md

(serve-replica-scheduling)=

# Replica scheduling

This guide explains how Ray Serve schedules deployment replicas across your cluster and the APIs and environment variables you can use to control placement behavior.

> ## Quick reference: Choosing the right approach

Reviewer: should we move this section to the bottom?

| Goal | Solution | Example |
|------|----------|---------|
| Multi-GPU inference with tensor parallelism | `placement_group_bundles` + `STRICT_PACK` | vLLM with `tensor_parallel_size=4` |
| Target specific GPU types or zones | Custom resources in `ray_actor_options` | Schedule on A100 nodes only |

> | Limit replicas per node for HA | `max_replicas_per_node` | Max 2 replicas of each deployment per node |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Limit replicas per node for high availability | `max_replicas_per_node` | Max 2 replicas of each deployment per node |
```

│                                     │               │                                     │
│  ┌─────────┐ ┌─────────┐ ┌───────┐  │               │  ┌─────────┐ ┌─────────┐ ┌───────┐  │
│  │ Node 1  │ │ Node 2  │ │Node 3 │  │               │  │ Node 1  │ │ Node 2  │ │Node 3 │  │
│  │ ┌─────┐ │ │ ┌─────┐ │ │┌─────┐│  │               │  │ ┌─────┐ │ │         │ │       │  │
│  │ │ R1  │ │ │ │ R2  │ │ ││ R3  ││  │               │  │ │ R1  │ │ │  idle   │ │ idle  │  │
│  │ └─────┘ │ │ └─────┘ │ │└─────┘│  │               │  │ │ R2  │ │ │         │ │       │  │
│  │         │ │         │ │       │  │               │  │ │ R3  │ │ │         │ │       │  │
│  └─────────┘ └─────────┘ └───────┘  │               │  └─────────┘ └─────────┘ └───────┘  │
│                                     │               │               ▲           ▲        │
│  ✓ High availability                │               │               └───────────┘        │
│  ✓ Load balanced                    │               │           Can be released          │
│  ✓ Reduced contention               │               │  ✓ Fewer nodes = lower cloud costs │

> └─────────────────────────────────────┘               └─────────────────────────────────────┘

Reviewer: the ascii art is a little misaligned on the right border

```

By default, Ray Serve uses a **spread scheduling strategy** that distributes replicas across nodes with best effort. This approach:
- Maximizes fault tolerance by avoiding concentration of replicas on a single node
- Balances load across the cluster
- Helps prevent resource contention between replicas

### Scheduling priority

When scheduling a replica, the scheduler evaluates strategies in the following priority order:

1. **Placement groups**: If you specify `placement_group_bundles`, the scheduler uses a `PlacementGroupSchedulingStrategy` to co-locate the replica with its required resources.

> 2. **Node affinity**: If the scheduler identifies a target node (for example, during pack scheduling), it uses a `NodeAffinitySchedulingStrategy` with soft constraints.

Reviewer: I think this concept is still a bit abstract to the reader even with the description. should we just link to the core scheduling page? or use the same wording: https://docs.ray.io/en/latest/ray-core/scheduling/index.html#nodeaffinityschedulingstrategy

4. **Default strategy**: Falls back to either `SPREAD` (default) or `DEFAULT` (when pack scheduling is enabled).

### Downscaling behavior

When Ray Serve scales down a deployment, it intelligently selects which replicas to stop:

1. **Non-running replicas first**: Pending, launching, or recovering replicas are stopped before running replicas.
2. **Minimize node count**: Running replicas are stopped from nodes with the fewest total replicas across all deployments, helping to free up nodes faster.
3. **Head node protection**: Replicas on the head node have the lowest priority for removal since the head node can't be released.

> 4. **Newest first**: Among replicas on the same node, newer replicas are stopped before older ones.

Reviewer: so in essence the order is:
1. non-running replicas
2. node with fewest # of replicas, prioritizing stopping newer replicas on the node
3. head node, prioritizing stopping newer replicas on the node

maybe we can combine the 4th fact into 2 and 3. might be easier to understand

:::

You can also specify this in a config file:

```yaml
applications:
  - name: my_app
    import_path: my_module:app
    deployments:
      - name: MyDeployment
        num_replicas: 6
        max_replicas_per_node: 2
```

### Reserve resources with placement groups

For more details on placement group strategies, see the [Ray Core placement groups documentation](ray-placement-group-doc-ref).

A **placement group** is a Ray primitive that reserves a group of resources (called **bundles**) across one or more nodes in your cluster. When you configure [`placement_group_bundles`](../api/doc/ray.serve.deployment_decorator.rst) for a Ray Serve deployment, Ray creates a dedicated placement group for *each replica*, ensuring those resources are reserved and available for that replica's use.

A **bundle** is a dictionary specifying resource requirements, such as `{"CPU": 2, "GPU": 1}`. When you define multiple bundles, you're telling Ray to reserve multiple sets of resources that can be placed according to your chosen strategy.

#### What placement groups and bundles mean

> The following diagram illustrates how a deployment with `placement_group_bundles=[{"GPU": 1}, {"GPU": 1}, {"CPU": 4}]` and [`placement_group_strategy`](../api/doc/ray.serve.deployment_decorator.rst)`="STRICT_PACK"` is scheduled:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following diagram illustrates how a deployment with `placement_group_bundles=[{"GPU": 1}, {"GPU": 1}, {"CPU": 4}]` and [`placement_group_strategy`](../api/doc/ray.serve.deployment_decorator.rst) set to `STRICT_PACK` is scheduled:
```

| **Heterogeneous resources** | Your replica needs different resource types, such as one GPU bundle and one CPU-only bundle for preprocessing. For example, an LLM service where tokenization and detokenization run on CPU workers while inference runs on the GPU, or an image classification pipeline with CPU-based image decoding/resizing before GPU inference. |
| **Cross-node distribution** | You need bundles spread across different nodes. Use `SPREAD` or `STRICT_SPREAD`. For example, serving a model with a massive embedding table (such as a recommendation model with billions of item embeddings) that must be sharded across multiple nodes because it exceeds single-node memory. Each bundle holds one shard, and `STRICT_SPREAD` ensures each shard is on a separate node. |

Don't use placement groups when:
- Your replica is self-contained and doesn't spawn additional actors/tasks
- You only need simple resource requirements (use `ray_actor_options` instead)

> - You want to use `max_replicas_per_node` (the two options are mutually exclusive)

Author: good point, explain how implicit resources are used for `max_replicas_per_node`

└─────────────────────────────────────┘               └────────────────────────────────────┘
```

By default, Ray Serve uses a **spread scheduling strategy** that distributes replicas across nodes with best effort. This approach:
- Maximizes fault tolerance by avoiding concentration of replicas on a single node
- Balances load across the cluster
- Helps prevent resource contention between replicas

### Scheduling priority

When scheduling a replica, the scheduler evaluates strategies in the following priority order:

1. **Placement groups**: If you specify `placement_group_bundles`, the scheduler uses a `PlacementGroupSchedulingStrategy` to co-locate the replica with its required resources.
2. **Pack scheduling with node affinity**: If pack scheduling is enabled, the scheduler identifies the best available node by preferring non-idle nodes (nodes already running replicas) and using a best-fit algorithm to minimize resource fragmentation. It then uses a `NodeAffinitySchedulingStrategy` with soft constraints to schedule the replica on that node.
3. **Default strategy**: Falls back to `SPREAD` when pack scheduling isn't enabled.

### Downscaling behavior

> When Ray Serve scales down a deployment, it intelligently selects which replicas to stop:

Author: not yet. But will be in future

This is different from simply requesting resources in `ray_actor_options`. With `ray_actor_options={"num_gpus": 2}`, your replica actor gets 2 GPUs but you have no control over where additional worker processes run. With placement groups, you explicitly reserve resources for both the replica and its workers.

#### When to use placement groups

| Scenario | Why placement groups help |
|----------|---------------------------|
| **Model parallelism** | Tensor parallelism or pipeline parallelism requires multiple GPUs that must communicate efficiently. Use `STRICT_PACK` to guarantee all GPUs are on the same node. For example, vLLM with `tensor_parallel_size=4` and the Ray distributed executor backend spawns 4 Ray worker actors (one per GPU shard), all of which must be on the same node for efficient inter-GPU communication via NVLink/NVSwitch. |
| **Replica spawns workers** | Your deployment creates Ray actors or tasks for parallel processing. Placement groups reserve resources for these workers. For example, a video processing service that spawns Ray tasks to decode frames in parallel, or a batch inference service using Ray Data to preprocess inputs before model inference. |

> | **Heterogeneous resources** | Your replica needs different resource types, such as one GPU bundle and one CPU-only bundle for preprocessing. For example, an LLM service where tokenization and detokenization run on CPU workers while inference runs on the GPU, or an image classification pipeline with CPU-based image decoding/resizing before GPU inference. |

Reviewer 2: I think the examples here are not very accurate - in the latter case you should probably decouple them as separate deployments and the former case is not really exercised either. I think its actually somewhat encapsulated in "Replica spawns workers"

| **Cross-node distribution** | You need bundles spread across different nodes. Use `SPREAD` or `STRICT_SPREAD`. For example, serving a model with a massive embedding table (such as a recommendation model with billions of item embeddings) that must be sharded across multiple nodes because it exceeds single-node memory. Each bundle holds one shard, and `STRICT_SPREAD` ensures each shard is on a separate node. |

Don't use placement groups when:
- Your replica is self-contained and doesn't spawn additional actors/tasks
- You only need simple resource requirements (use `ray_actor_options` instead)

> - You want to use `max_replicas_per_node`. These options are mutually exclusive because `max_replicas_per_node` controls replica distribution at the node level, while placement groups control scheduling at the placement group level with their own strategies. Combining them would create conflicting scheduling behavior.

Reviewer 2: this doesn't seem fundamental? Just a gap in the current implementation
